doc/source/phy.md, before:

# Physical Layer

This chapter provides a description of the I3C PHY Layer logic.

## Common PHY Layer

The PHY is responsible for controlling external bus signals (SDA, SCL) and synchronizing them with an internal clock. It should also support bus arbitration.
The [I2C Core](https://opentitan.org/book/hw/ip/i2c/index.html) from the OpenTitan project can be used as a reference design for basic features of the PHY.

:::{figure-md} i3c_phy
![](img/i3c_phy.png)

Block diagram of the I3C PHY Layer
:::

### SDA and SCL lines (5.1.3.1)

Both I2C and I3C datasheets specify that SDA and SCL lines should be bidirectional, connected to an active Open Drain class Pull-Up.
Bus lines should be HIGH unless any device ties them to the GROUND.

:::{note}
In addition to the active Open Drain class Pull-Up, a High-Keeper is also required on the Bus.
The High-Keeper on the Bus should be strong enough to prevent system leakage from pulling SDA, and sometimes SCL, Low.
The High-Keeper on the Bus should also be weak enough for a Target with the minimum I{sub}`OL` PHY to be able to pull SDA, SCL, or both Low within the Minimum t{sub}`DIG_L` period.

The High-Keeper should be implemented during the physical design.
PHY driver strength modeling will not be performed in this project.
Base Controller will be delivered without the High-Keeper, however, it may become a configuration option later on.
:::

Each bus line must be capable of switching between 4 logic states:

1. No Pull-Up (High-Z)
2. High-Keeper Pull-Up
3. Open Drain Pull-Up
4. Assert LOW

The OpenTitan I2C Core implements a [Virtual Open Drain](https://opentitan.org/book/hw/ip/i2c/doc/theory_of_operation.html#virtual-open-drain) functionality which seems like a good solution for implementing the desired behavior on FPGA devices, while at the same time keeping it easy to use in silicon chips. Each bus line consists of 3 lines:

1. Signal input (`scl_i`, `sda_i`) - external input from the bus lines.
2. Signal output (`scl_o`, `sda_o`) - internal signal, it is tied to the GROUND.
3. Signal output enable (`scl_en_o`, `sda_en_o`) - internal signal enable, controlled by the core FSM.

This interface makes it easy to construct tri-state buffers.
The controller will never assert the external bus lines HIGH, since it is assumed that these lines are pulled up to V{sub}`dd` externally.
Switching from output to input is enough to achieve signals asserted HIGH.

Verilator does not natively support `x` and `z` states and their handling is explained in the [official documentation](https://verilator.org/guide/latest/languages.html?highlight=tristate#tri-inout).
Cocotb requires a wrapper to interact properly with an `inout`, which is described in [Cocotb discussion #3506](https://github.com/cocotb/cocotb/discussions/3506).
Considering these limitations, PHY is being tested functionally using Cocotb and tri-state logic.
Additionally, there is an RTL testbench run in Verilator and Icarus simulators that checks whether High-Z is set properly on I3C bus lines when the controller requests a high bus state.

### Clock synchronization (5.1.7)

The entire core functions in a single clock domain - all I3C bus signals are sampled with this clock.

### I3C timing configuration

The core implements 4 CSRs for controlling timings of the I3C bus:

* `T_F_REG` - SCL falling time
* `T_R_REG` - SCL rise time
* `T_HD_DAT_REG` - SDA hold time
* `T_SU_DAT_REG` - SDA setup time

In the target configuration, the first three should be set to `0`, the `T_SU_DAT_REG` should be set according to the following equation:

```
reg_val = $ceil(3 / system_clock_period) - 1
T_SU_DAT_REG = reg_val > 0 ? reg_val : 0
```

For system clock frequencies below 320MHz, the core should be configured with the `DisableInputFF` parameter set to `True` (see [example configuration](https://github.com/chipsalliance/i3c-core/blob/main/i3c_core_configs.yaml#L49))
This parameter removes one flipflop on the input lines, shortening the response latency.

Example configurations:

* 160MHz system clock (minimal operting clock) - `DisableInputFF=True`, `T_SU_DAT_REG=0`
* 400MHz system clock - `DisableInputFF=False`, `T_SU_DAT_REG=0`
* 1GHz system clock - `DisableInputFF=False`, `T_SU_DAT_REG=2`

Commit message:

docs: add info on core config generation
Signed-off-by: Karol Gugala <kgugala@antmicro.com>

doc/source/phy.md, after:

# Physical Layer

This chapter provides a description of the I3C PHY Layer logic.

## Common PHY Layer

The PHY is responsible for controlling external bus signals (SDA, SCL) and synchronizing them with an internal clock. It should also support bus arbitration.
The [I2C Core](https://opentitan.org/book/hw/ip/i2c/index.html) from the OpenTitan project can be used as a reference design for basic features of the PHY.

:::{figure-md} i3c_phy
![](img/i3c_phy.png)

Block diagram of the I3C PHY Layer
:::

### SDA and SCL lines (5.1.3.1)

Both I2C and I3C datasheets specify that SDA and SCL lines should be bidirectional, connected to an active Open Drain class Pull-Up.
Bus lines should be HIGH unless any device ties them to the GROUND.

:::{note}
In addition to the active Open Drain class Pull-Up, a High-Keeper is also required on the Bus.
The High-Keeper on the Bus should be strong enough to prevent system leakage from pulling SDA, and sometimes SCL, Low.
The High-Keeper on the Bus should also be weak enough for a Target with the minimum I{sub}`OL` PHY to be able to pull SDA, SCL, or both Low within the Minimum t{sub}`DIG_L` period.

The High-Keeper should be implemented during the physical design.
PHY driver strength modeling will not be performed in this project.
Base Controller will be delivered without the High-Keeper, however, it may become a configuration option later on.
:::

Each bus line must be capable of switching between 4 logic states:

1. No Pull-Up (High-Z)
2. High-Keeper Pull-Up
3. Open Drain Pull-Up
4. Assert LOW

The OpenTitan I2C Core implements a [Virtual Open Drain](https://opentitan.org/book/hw/ip/i2c/doc/theory_of_operation.html#virtual-open-drain) functionality which seems like a good solution for implementing the desired behavior on FPGA devices, while at the same time keeping it easy to use in silicon chips. Each bus line consists of 3 lines:

1. Signal input (`scl_i`, `sda_i`) - external input from the bus lines.
2. Signal output (`scl_o`, `sda_o`) - internal signal, it is tied to the GROUND.
3. Signal output enable (`scl_en_o`, `sda_en_o`) - internal signal enable, controlled by the core FSM.

This interface makes it easy to construct tri-state buffers.
The controller will never assert the external bus lines HIGH, since it is assumed that these lines are pulled up to V{sub}`dd` externally.
Switching from output to input is enough to achieve signals asserted HIGH.

Verilator does not natively support `x` and `z` states and their handling is explained in the [official documentation](https://verilator.org/guide/latest/languages.html?highlight=tristate#tri-inout).
Cocotb requires a wrapper to interact properly with an `inout`, which is described in [Cocotb discussion #3506](https://github.com/cocotb/cocotb/discussions/3506).
Considering these limitations, PHY is being tested functionally using Cocotb and tri-state logic.
Additionally, there is an RTL testbench run in Verilator and Icarus simulators that checks whether High-Z is set properly on I3C bus lines when the controller requests a high bus state.

### Clock synchronization (5.1.7)

The entire core functions in a single clock domain - all I3C bus signals are sampled with this clock.

### I3C timing configuration

The core implements 4 CSRs for controlling timings of the I3C bus:

* `T_F_REG` - SCL falling time
* `T_R_REG` - SCL rise time
* `T_HD_DAT_REG` - SDA hold time
* `T_SU_DAT_REG` - SDA setup time

In the target configuration, the first three should be set to `0`, the `T_SU_DAT_REG` should be set according to the following equation:

```
reg_val = $floor(3 / system_clock_period) - 1
T_SU_DAT_REG = reg_val > 0 ? reg_val : 0
```

For system clock frequencies below 320MHz, the core should be configured with the `DisableInputFF` parameter set to `True` (see [example configuration](https://github.com/chipsalliance/i3c-core/blob/main/i3c_core_configs.yaml#L49))
This parameter removes one flipflop on the input lines, shortening the response latency.

The core provides 2 configurations with the `DisableInputFF` parameter set to `True`.
In order to generate a configuration with the parameter set, run the following command from the top level of the I3C repository:

```
  make generate CFG_NAME=ahb CFG_FILE=i3c_core_configs.yaml
```

or

```
  make generate CFG_NAME=axi CFG_FILE=i3c_core_configs.yaml
```

Depending on the chosen bus interface.
More Information about the configuration tool can be found in the relevant [README](https://github.com/chipsalliance/i3c-core/blob/main/tools/i3c_config/README.md)

Example configurations:

* 160MHz system clock (minimal operting clock) - `DisableInputFF=True`, `T_SU_DAT_REG=0`
* 400MHz system clock - `DisableInputFF=False`, `T_SU_DAT_REG=0`
* 1GHz system clock - `DisableInputFF=False`, `T_SU_DAT_REG=2`
